# Macros for reusable code 🦆⚽

Before we get to macros, there is an exercise from the previous post to discuss. Let's look at the final league table positions for season 1996-1997:

```tsql
SELECT
  ccode,
  club_name,
  league_position
FROM vw_ltables v
JOIN clubs c ON v.ccode = c.club_code
WHERE season = '1996_1997'
  AND league_position > 17
ORDER BY 3;
```

Produces the following:

| ccode |     club_name     | league_position |
|-------|-------------------|----------------:|
| COV   | Coventry City     | 18              |
| SUN   | Sunderland        | 19              |
| NFO   | Nottingham Forest | 20              |


However, if we compare this to the OUTER JOIN query on season 1997-1997 to season 1998-1999, we can see that Coventry City was not relegated, instead, it was Middlesbrough (club code MID):

```tsql
WITH s1 AS(
  SELECT ccode
  FROM vw_ltables
WHERE season = '1996_1997'
),
s2 AS(
  SELECT ccode
  FROM vw_ltables
  WHERE season = '1997_1998'
)
SELECT
  COALESCE(s1.ccode, 'Promoted') season1,
  COALESCE(s2.ccode, 'Relegated') season2
FROM s1
FULL OUTER JOIN s2 ON s1.ccode = s2.ccode
WHERE s1.ccode IS NULL OR s2.ccode IS NULL;
```

Produces:

| season1  |  season2  |
|----------|-----------|
| SUN      | Relegated |
| NFO      | Relegated |
| MID      | Relegated |
| Promoted | BOL       |
| Promoted | BAR       |
| Promoted | CRY       |


At first I thought the discrepancy was a data error but the [Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1996%E2%80%9397_FA_Premier_League) for the season states that:

_"Middlesbrough finished in 19th place, but would have been placed 14th without a three-point deduction imposed for unilaterally postponing a 21 December 1996 fixture at Blackburn Rovers, with the Middlesbrough board making the decision due to the absence of 23 players ill or injured."_. 

I have not changed the source for this points deduction and left Middlesbrough with their 42 points but this highlights a general point about data: there are always exceptions to business rules due special cases like this. Therefore discrepancies cannot always be attributed to data errors.

## Macros

In the exercise above we have different queries to inform us of  club relegations and promotions between seasons. However, we have to _hard-code_ the season text values for the seasons we are comparing. Hard-coding values that have to be changed frequently should be avoided if possible. Thankfully, DuckDB introduced [macros](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/statements/create_macro.html) which provide a type of user-defined functionality to DuckDB. Macros in DuckDB are similar to SQL user-defined functions in PostgreSQL, that is when you set _LANGUAGE SQL_ in the function definition. Where DuckDB's macros are especially useful is in defining what in Microsoft Access is called a _parameter query_. We could create a view for relegations and promotions for each season but that would be extremely repetitive and a maintenance headache; this is where macros come to the rescue so let's see how they work and how we can use them.

From the documentation:

_"The CREATE MACRO statement can create a scalar or table macro (function) in the catalog. A macro may only be a single SELECT statement (similar to a VIEW), but it has the benefit of accepting parameters."_

We are going to create a _TABLE MACRO_ for our promotions/relegations and we will use the outer join version for this. We will create the macro in a schema we will call _macros_, I am using a PostgreSQL practice here where I create functions and procedures in their own schemas. I have enhanced the query to produce the more readable club names rather than the slightly cryptic club codes by using inner joins in both the CTEs.

```tsql
CREATE SCHEMA macros;
```

```tsql
USE macros;
CREATE OR REPLACE MACRO releg_promo(p_season1, p_season2) AS TABLE
WITH s1 AS(
  SELECT c.club_name
  FROM main.vw_ltables v
  JOIN main.clubs c
    ON v.ccode = c.club_code
WHERE season = p_season1
),
s2 AS(
  SELECT c.club_name
  FROM main.vw_ltables v
  JOIN main.clubs c
    ON v.ccode = c.club_code
  WHERE season = p_season2
)
SELECT
  COALESCE(s1.club_name, 'Promoted') season1,
  COALESCE(s2.club_name, 'Relegated') season2
FROM s1
FULL OUTER JOIN s2 ON s1.club_name = s2.club_name
WHERE s1.club_name IS NULL OR s2.club_name IS NULL;
```
### Code notes

- I use the _p\__ prefix for parameters; another PostgreSQL habit that helps me distinguish parameters from, say, column names.
- Note, unlike in PostgreSQL functions, the parameters are not qualified with a data type. an equivalent SQL function in PostgreSQL would define them as "p_season1 TEXT, p_season2 TEXT"
- We can now call our macro like so:

```tsql
USE main;
SELECT * FROM macros.releg_promo('1996_1997', '1997_1998');
```

And we get the following output:

|      season1      |     season2      |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Middlesbrough     | Relegated        |
| Nottingham Forest | Relegated        |
| Sunderland        | Relegated        |
| Promoted          | Crystal Palace   |
| Promoted          | Barnsley         |
| Promoted          | Bolton Wanderers |


- We now have convenient mechanism for generating equivalent for any seasons we choose.

## Wrap-up

Macros are a great feature of DuckDB and they really help cut down on repetive code (always a good thing). It will be interesting to see if DuckDB goes on to implement a full stored procedure language like PL/pgSQL in PostgreSQL. That said, the macros are really nice to have.

## Next up

Generating running totals using window functions.